Add use-case for decentralized identity (#6082)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/decentralized-identity.md

---
title: Decentralized identity 
description: What is decentralized identity, and why does it matter?
lang: en
template: use-cases
emoji: ":id:"
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2

> summaryPoint1: Centralized identity systems are fragmented, poorly secured, and offer minimal privacy protection.

Reviewer: The rest of the page is looking really good... I think we could strengthen these summary points now based on the latest the page has to offer.

Would consider along the lines of
1. Traditionally identity systems have centralized the issuance, maintenance and control of your identifiers.
2. Decentralized identity solutions give the power back to the individual, further decreasing reliance on centralized third-parties
3. Thanks to crypto, users now have the tools to issue, hold and control their own identifiers and attestations once again

Author: Just added this now.

summaryPoint2: Decentralized identity increases personal control of one's identity information.
summaryPoint3: Decentralized identity projects can revolutionize identity management. 
---

> 

Author: Yeah, so I figured we could start with a "What is decentralized identity?" section to broach the idea and use that to lead into the next section explaining identifiers, identity, and attestations. I changed the structure, so the identity/identifier/attestation section are now H3s. I felt it made sense to put them under the preceding section. 

I also structured the intro that way to help with SEO. It might be good to have a paragraph that answers "What is decentralized identity" at the beginning. LMK what you think about it.

> 

Author: I just added a new intro. LMK if it works.

## What are identifiers? {#what-are-identifiers}

An identifier is a piece of information that helps build a person's identity. Common identifiers include: 

- Name
- Social security number/tax ID number 
- Mobile number 
- Date and place of birth
- Digital identification credentials, e.g., email addresses, usernames, avatars

It is important to understand that in these traditional examples of identifiers that _issuance_ and _control_ over these identifiers are maintained by a central agency. For example, legal names require permission from a government for issuance or before being changed, and changes to your social media handle require permission from the platform. 

## What are attestations? {#what-are-attestations}
 
An attestation is a claim made by one entity about another entity. If you live in the United States, the driver's license issued to you by the Department of Motor Vehicles (one entity) attests that you (another entity) are legally allowed to drive a car.

> Attestations are different from identifiers. An attestation _contains_ identifiers to reference a particular identity, and makes a claim about an attribute related to this identity. So, your driver's license has identifiers (name, date of birth, address) but is also the attestation about your legal right to drive.

Reviewer: 👍

One concern with storing attestations on-chain is that they might contain information individuals want to keep private. The public nature of the Ethereum blockchain makes it unattractive to store such attestations. 

The solution is to issue attestations, held by users off-chain in digital wallets, but signed with the issuer's DID stored on-chain. These attestations are encoded as [JSON Web Tokens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token) and contain the issuer's digital signature—which allows for easy verification of off-chain claims.

Here's an hypothetical scenario to explain off-chain attestations:

1. A university (the issuer) generates an attestation (a digital academic certificate), signs with its keys, and issues it to Bob (the identity owner). 

2. Bob applies for a job and wants to prove his academic qualifications to an employer, so he shares the attestation from his mobile wallet. The company (the verifier) can then confirm the validity of the attestation by checking the issuer's DID (i.e., its public key on Ethereum). 

### Off-chain attestations with persistent access {#offchain-attestations-with-persistent-access}

> Under this arrangement attestations are transformed into JSON files and stored off-chain (ideally on a [decentralized cloud storage](/developers/docs/storage/) platform, such as IPFS or Swarm). However, a hash of the JSON file is stored on-chain and linked to a DID via an on-chain registry. The associated DID could either be that of the issuer of the attestation or the recipient. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under this arrangement attestations are transformed into JSON files and stored off-chain (ideally on a [decentralized cloud storage](/developers/docs/storage/) platform, such as IPFS or Swarm). However, a [hash](/glossary/#hash) of the JSON file is stored on-chain and linked to a DID via an on-chain registry. The associated DID could either be that of the issuer of the attestation or the recipient. 
```

### On-chain attestations {#onchain-attestations}

On-chain attestations are held in [smart contracts](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/) on the Ethereum blockchain. The smart contract (acting as a registry) will map an attestation to a corresponding on-chain decentralized identifier (a public key).

Here's an example to show how on-chain attestations might work in practice:

1. A company (XYZ Corp) plans to sell ownership shares using a smart contract but only wants buyers that have completed a background check.

2. XYZ Corp can have the company performing background checks to issue on-chain attestations on Ethereum. This attestation certifies that an individual has passed the background check without exposing any personal information.

3. The smart contract selling shares can check the registry contract for the identities of screened buyers, making it possible for the smart contract to determine who is permitted to buy shares or not.

## Benefits of decentralized identity {#benefits-of-decentralized-identity} 

> 1. Decentralized identity increases increases individual control of identifying information. Decentralized identifiers and attestations can be verified without relying on centralized authorities and third-party services. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Decentralized identity increases individual control of identifying information. Decentralized identifiers and attestations can be verified without relying on centralized authorities and third-party services. 
```

## Decentralized identity use-cases {#decentralized-identity-use-cases}

Decentralized identity has many potential use-cases:

### 1. Universal logins {#universal-dapp-logins} 
[Decentralized applications](/dapps/) can issue attestations to users, which can be stored in an Ethereum wallet. An attestation in this case could be an an [NFT](/nft/) granting the holder access to an online community. 

A [Sign-In with Ethereum](https://login.xyz/) function would then enable servers to confirm the user's Ethereum account and fetch the required attestation from their account address. This means users can access the dapp without inputting passwords or sharing personal information.  

### 2. KYC authentication {#kyc-authentication}

Using many online services requires individuals to provide attestations and credentials, such as a driving license or national passport. But this approach is problematic because private user information can be compromised and service providers cannot verify the authenticity of the attestation. 

> Decentralized identity allows companies to skip on conventional Know-Your-Customer (KYC) processes and authenticate user identities via Verifiable Credentials. This reduces the cost of identity management and prevents the use of fake documentation. 

Reviewer: Potentially a new term for people
```suggestion
Decentralized identity allows companies to skip on conventional [Know-Your-Customer (KYC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Know_your_customer) processes and authenticate user identities via Verifiable Credentials. This reduces the cost of identity management and prevents the use of fake documentation. 
```

---
title: Decentralized Identity 
description: An overview of decentralized identity on Ethereum
lang: en
template: use-cases
emoji: ":id:"
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2
summaryPoint1: Centralized identity systems are fragmented, poorly secured, and offer minimal privacy protection
summaryPoint2: Decentralized identity increases personal control of one's identity information.
summaryPoint3: Decentralized ID projects built on Ethereum can revolutionize identity management. 
---

# What are identity, identifiers and attestations? {#what-are-identity-identifiers-attestations}

## What is identity {#what-is-identity}

Identity means an individual's sense of self, defined by a set of unique characteristics. Identity refers to the fact of being an _individual_, i.e., a distinct human entity. Identity could also refer to other non-human entities, such as an organization or authority.

## What are identifiers? {#what-are-identifiers}

An identifier is a piece of information that can be used to distinguish a person's identity. Common identifiers include the following: 
- Name
- Social security number/tax ID number 
- Mobile number 
- Date and place of birth

> - Digital identification credentials, e.g., passwords, email address, usernames

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Digital identification credentials, e.g., email addresses, usernames, avatars
```

Reviewer: (Wouldn't use passwords here... those are more in line with authentication than an identifier)

> 

Reviewer: Would introduce here the concept that these classic examples of identifiers are all issued, held and controlled by central entities:
ie
Name -- _Legal name_ issued by government, and cannot be issued/changed without permission
SSN/TIN -- Issued by government, cannot be issued/changed without permission
Mobile number -- Issued by phone company, a new number or changing your old number requires permission from phone company
Twitter/Facebook/Discord/Reddit/GitHub/etc handle -- Requires permission from platform to issue or change.

```suggestion

It is important to understand that in these traditional examples of identifiers that _issuance_ and _control_ over these identifiers are maintained by a central agency. For example, legal names require permission from a government for issuance or before being changed, and changes to your social media handle require permission from the platform. 

```

Author: This is a good point. Thanks for adding it.

## What are attestations? {#what-are-attestations}
 

> An attestation refers to a claim made by an entity about another entity. An example attestation is a driver's license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). The driver's license, which proves a specific claim (that the holder has legal permission to drive a car) is made by one entity (the DMV) about another entity (Bob, the driver). 

Reviewer: Doesn't "prove" anything, just makes an attestation about that thing. 
```suggestion
An attestation refers to a claim made by an entity about another entity. An example attestation is a driver's license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). A driver's license, which provides a specific claim (that the holder has legal permission and is competent enough to drive a car) is made by one entity (the DMV) about another entity (the driver). 
```

Author: Oh. I kinda mentioned that attestations prove claims in some other places. I was thinking something like a driving license proves a claim, i.e., that you can drive. The person (i.e., the driver) already provides the claim methinks.

> Although attestations and identities are different, an attestation contains identifiers that point to an individual's identity. The driver's license mentioned earlier, for example, may have identifiers, like the holder’s name, date of birth, and nationality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attestations are different from identifiers. An attestation _contains_ identifiers to reference a particular identity, and makes a claim about an attribute related to this identity. The driver's license mentioned earlier, for example, has a mix of both identifiers (such as name, date of birth, and address), as well as an attestation about this individuals legal right to operate a vehicle.
```

## What are decentralized identifiers? {#what-are-decentralized-identifiers}

> Decentralized identifiers (DIDs) are identifiers that are not issued, managed, or controlled by a central authority. Traditional identifiers, like an email address or mobile number, are reliant on intermediaries—email providers, mobile network operators, and so on. 

Reviewer: As noted above, would add some of this content to the above section, and rephrase this a little:
```suggestion
As mentioned, traditional identifiers like legal name, email address or Twitter handle are all reliant on intermediaries such as a governments, email providers or social media platforms. Decentralized identifiers (DIDs) are identifiers that are not issued, managed, or controlled by any central authority.
```
""

> Decentralized identifiers are issued, held, and controlled by individuals. An [Ethereum account](/developers/docs/accounts/), for example, is a decentralized identifier. Anyone can create an account, set up a wallet, and validate their identity on the Ethereum network. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decentralized identifiers are issued, held, and controlled by individuals. An [Ethereum account](/developers/docs/accounts/) is an example of a decentralized identifier. Anyone is free to create as many accounts as they wish, without permission from anyone, and without need to store this identifier in a central registry.
```

---
title: Decentralized Identity 
description: An overview of decentralized identity on Ethereum
lang: en
template: use-cases
emoji: ":id:"
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2
summaryPoint1: Centralized identity systems are fragmented, poorly secured, and offer minimal privacy protection
summaryPoint2: Decentralized identity increases personal control of one's identity information.
summaryPoint3: Decentralized ID projects built on Ethereum can revolutionize identity management. 
---

# What are identity, identifiers and attestations? {#what-are-identity-identifiers-attestations}

## What is identity {#what-is-identity}

Identity means an individual's sense of self, defined by a set of unique characteristics. Identity refers to the fact of being an _individual_, i.e., a distinct human entity. Identity could also refer to other non-human entities, such as an organization or authority.

> ## What are identifiers? {#what-are-identifiers}

Author: So, I changed the text to read: *"Identifiers are part of an identity. Specifically, an identifier is a piece of information that helps build a person's identity."*

Does that sound alright?

An identifier is a piece of information that can be used to distinguish a person's identity. Common identifiers include the following: 
- Name
- Social security number/tax ID number 
- Mobile number 
- Date and place of birth
- Digital identification credentials, e.g., email addresses, usernames, avatars

> It is important to understand that in these traditional examples of identifiers that _issuance_ and _control_ over these identifiers are maintained by a central agency. For example, legal names require permission from a government for issuance or before being changed, and changes to your social media handle require permission from the platform. 

Author: So @wackerow and I wanted to clearly distinguish between *identity* and *identifiers*, because people often confuse the two. That's why the sentence reads "traditional examples of identifiers...". 

Also, the paragraph may seem wordy, but I think it helps drive home the main point of the page, i.e., traditional identifiers are issued, maintained, and controlled by central agencies (the "maintained" part refers to storing identifiers in databases). LMK what you think, though.

> It is important to understand that in these traditional examples of identifiers that _issuance_ and _control_ over these identifiers are maintained by a central agency. For example, legal names require permission from a government for issuance or before being changed, and changes to your social media handle require permission from the platform. 

Author: Changed this to read: *"...changes to your social media handle require permission from the platform."* I think we want to emphasize the personal aspect of social media handles because it's an example most people can easily process.

## What are attestations? {#what-are-attestations}
 

> An attestation refers to a claim made by an entity about another entity. An example attestation is a driver's license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). A driver's license, which provides a specific claim (that the holder has legal permission and is competent enough to drive a car) is made by one entity (the DMV) about another entity (the driver). 

Author: Yeah, this is good.

> Attestations are different from identifiers. An attestation _contains_ identifiers to reference a particular identity, and makes a claim about an attribute related to this identity. The driver's license mentioned earlier, for example, has a mix of both identifiers (such as name, date of birth, and address), as well as an attestation about this individuals legal right to operate a vehicle.

Author: I think @wackerow made that edit to better highlight the difference between attestations, identifiers, and identity. Here's what I had in the original page:

*"Although attestations and identities are different, an attestation contains identifiers that point to an individual's identity. The driver's license mentioned earlier, for example, may have identifiers, like the holder’s name, date of birth, and nationality.*"

Tbh, I doubt we can simplify that concept any further. Especially because decentralized identity can be a hard concept to wrap one's head around (and we don't want readers to miss the point). Let me know what you think, though.

## What are decentralized identifiers? {#what-are-decentralized-identifiers}

As mentioned, traditional identifiers like legal name, email address or Twitter handle are all reliant on intermediaries such as a governments, email providers or social media platforms. Decentralized identifiers (DIDs) are identifiers that are not issued, managed, or controlled by any central authority.

> Decentralized identifiers are issued, held, and controlled by individuals. An [Ethereum account](/developers/docs/accounts/) is an example of a decentralized identifier. Anyone is free to create as many accounts as they wish, without permission from anyone, and without need to store this identifier in a central registry.

Author: Yeah, that's kind of the idea of decentralized/self-sovereign identity (i.e., you can issue yourself an identifier without relying on any entity). I think creating an Ethereum account would qualify as self-issuing digital identifiers since you can do it without inputs from others. 

Here's a definition of decentralized identity for context: 

*"What is a decentralized identity? Decentralized identity is based on a trust framework for identity management. It allows users to generate and control their own digital identity without depending on a specific service provider."*

DIDs are stored on distributed ledgers (blockchains) or peer-to-peer networks. This makes DIDs [globally unique, resolvable with high availability, and cryptographically verifiable](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-primer/). A DID can be associated with different entities, including people, organizations, or government institutions.  

> ## What makes this possible? {what-makes-decentralized-identifiers-possible} 

Author: Alright. I'll replace it with the text in the header ID ("What makes decentralized identifiers possible?")

### 1. Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) {#public-key-infrastructure} 

Public-key infrastructure (PKI) is an information security measure that generates a [public key](/glossary/#public-key) and [private key](/glossary/#private-key) for an entity. Public-key cryptography is used in blockchain networks to authenticate user identities and prove ownership of digital assets. 

> A DID, like an Ethereum account, will have a private key and a public key. While the private key is used for encrypting and signing messages, the public key authenticates the identity of the entity controlling a DID. PKI provides proofs needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and use of fake identities.

Author: Per what I know, all DIDs have public/private keys, or proving control of the identifier or issuance of an attestation would be difficult. Here are some related points from the W3C document on DIDs: 

*Verification method*
*"A set of parameters that can be used together with a process to independently verify a proof. For example, a cryptographic public key can be used as a verification method with respect to a digital signature; in such usage, it verifies that the signer possessed the associated cryptographic private key."*

*Verification Methods*
*"A [DID document](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-did-documents) can express [verification methods](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-verification-method), such as cryptographic public keys, which can be used to [authenticate](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-authenticated) or authorize interactions with the [DID subject](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-did-subjects) or associated parties. For example, a cryptographic public key can be used as a [verification method](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-verification-method) with respect to a digital signature; in such usage, it verifies that the signer could use the associated cryptographic private key."*

> A DID, like an Ethereum account, will have a private key and a public key. While the private key is used for encrypting and signing messages, the public key authenticates the identity of the entity controlling a DID. PKI provides proofs needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and use of fake identities.

Reviewer: > decentralized identifier (DID)
> A globally unique persistent identifier that does not require a centralized registration authority and is often generated and/or registered cryptographically. The generic format of a DID is defined in [§ 3.1 DID Syntax](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-syntax). A specific [DID scheme](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-did-schemes) is defined in a [DID method](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-did-methods) specification. Many—but not all—DID methods make use of [distributed ledger technology](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#dfn-distributed-ledger-technology) (DLT) or some other form of decentralized network.

Notably
> "is often generated and/or registered cryptographically"
> "Many—but not all—DID methods make use of distributed ledger technology (DLT)"

Sounds like this is the majority of cases, but not all. I would keep this a little more open

> A DID, like an Ethereum account, will have a private key and a public key. While the private key is used for encrypting and signing messages, the public key authenticates the identity of the entity controlling a DID. PKI provides proofs needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and use of fake identities.

Reviewer: You would encrypt a message using the recipients public key. You would decrypt a message directed to your public key with your private key.
Public keys wouldn't authenticate, they would identify... the private key would authenticate.

```suggestion
Some decentralized identifiers, such as an Ethereum account, have public and private keys. The public key identifies the account's controller, while the private keys can sign and decrypt messages for this account. Public-key infrastructure provides the proof needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and the use of fake identities.
```

### 2. Decentralized datastores {#decentralized-datastores}

A blockchain serves as a verifiable data registry; an open, trustless, and decentralized repository of information. The existence of public blockchains, like Ethereum, eliminates the need to store identifiers in centralized registries. 

If anyone needs to confirm the validity of a DID, they can look up the associated public key on the blockchain. This is different from traditional identifiers that can only be authenticated by third parties. 

## How do decentralized identifiers and attestations enable decentralized identity? {#how-decentralized-identifiers-and-attestations-enable-decentralized-identity} 

> Decentralized identifiers (DIDs) and attestations are the major building blocks of decentralized identity. Decentralized identity or self-sovereign identity is the idea that identity-related information should be self-controlled, private, and portable. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decentralized identity is the idea that identity-related information should be self-controlled, private, and portable, with decentralized identifiers and attestations being the primary building blocks.
```

> In the context of decentralized identity, attestations (also known as [Verifiable Credentials](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/)) are tamper-proof, cryptographically verifiable claims made by the issuer. Every attestation or Verifiable Credential an entity (e.g., an organization) issues is associated with their DID. 

Reviewer 2: > cryptographically verifiable

we shouldn't assume users know what this means

Author: The only alternative would be to take out "cryptographically", but that'd like bury the point (i.e., claims that are verifiable with cryptographic keys). Again, it's a question of whether simplifying some concepts further is necessary. 

I do think the "cryptographically verifiable" concept is explained in other parts, so someone who's read the entire thing should grasp it. For example: *"Because DIDs are stored on the blockchain, anyone can verify the validity of an attestation by cross-checking the issuer's DID on Ethereum.*"

Reviewer: I would keep it in... at this point we've already introduced PKI. 
If needed, we could maybe just add a note to the section above where we talk about private/public keys and mention this. ie:
> PKI provides proofs needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and use of fake identities, using [cryptographic signatures](https://andersbrownworth.com/blockchain/public-private-keys/) to verify all claims.

Reviewer: I would keep it in... at this point we've already introduced PKI. 
If needed, we could maybe just add a note to the section above where we talk about private/public keys and mention this. ie:
> PKI provides proofs needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and use of fake identities, using [cryptographic signatures](https://andersbrownworth.com/blockchain/public-private-keys/) to verify all claims.

Author: > I would keep it in... at this point we've already introduced PKI. If needed, we could maybe just add a note to the section above where we talk about private/public keys and mention this. ie:
> 
> > PKI provides proofs needed to authenticate entities and prevent impersonation and use of fake identities, using [cryptographic signatures](https://andersbrownworth.com/blockchain/public-private-keys/) to verify all claims.

Added this now.

Because DIDs are stored on the blockchain, anyone can verify the validity of an attestation by cross-checking the issuer's DID on Ethereum. Essentially, the Ethereum blockchain acts like a global directory that enables the verification of DIDs associated with certain entities.

Decentralized identifiers are the reason attestations are self-controlled and verifiable. Even if the issuer doesn't exist anymore, the holder always has proof of the attestation's provenance and validity. 

> DIDs are also crucial to the goal of protect the privacy of personal information through decentralized identity. For instance, if an individual submits proof of an attestation (a driver's license), the verifying party doesn't need to check the validity of information in the proof. The verifier only needs cryptographic guarantees of the attestation's authenticity and the identity of the issuing organization to determine if the proof is valid. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decentralized identifiers are also crucial to protecting the privacy of personal information through decentralized identity. For instance, if an individual submits proof of an attestation (a driver's license), the verifying party doesn't need to check the validity of information in the proof. Instead, the verifier only needs cryptographic guarantees of the attestation's authenticity and the identity of the issuing organization to determine if the proof is valid. 
```

## Types of attestations in decentralized identity {#types-of-attestations-in-decentralized-identity}

How attestation information is stored and retrieved in an Ethereum-based identity ecosystem is different from traditional identity management. Here is an overview of the various approaches to issuing, storing, and verifying attestations in decentralized identity systems: 

### Off-chain attestations {#off-chain-attestations}

> A major concern with storing attestations on-chain is that they contain personally identifiable information (PII) that individuals want to keep private. The transparent nature of the Ethereum blockchain, therefore, makes it unattractive for storing attestations. 

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it's worth talking about zk here yet.

Author: Yeah, I considered it, but dropped it later because it'd be like forcing readers to take in too much information at a go. I felt that suggesting decentralized identity can prove validity of information without revealing the information was enough (without going down the zk rabbit hole). Methinks if we have a page on ZK proofs, then we can explain how ZK proofs work for identity (and probably link to the decentralized identity page).

> A major concern with storing attestations on-chain is that they contain personally identifiable information (PII) that individuals want to keep private. The transparent nature of the Ethereum blockchain, therefore, makes it unattractive for storing attestations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One concern with storing attestations on-chain is that they might contain information individuals want to keep private. The public nature of the Ethereum blockchain makes it unattractive to store such attestations. 
```

The solution is to issue attestations, held by users off-chain in digital wallets, but signed with the issuer's DID stored on-chain. These attestations are encoded as [JSON Web Tokens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token) and contain the issuer's digital signature—which allows for easy verification of off-chain claims.

Here's an hypothetical scenario to explain off-chain attestations:

1. A university (the issuer) generates an attestation (a digital academic certificate), signs with its keys, and issues it to Bob (the identity owner). 

> 2. Bob applies for a job and wants to prove his academic qualifications to an  employer, so he shares the attestation from his mobile wallet. The company (the verifier) can then confirm the validity of the attestation by checking the issuer's DID (i.e., its public key on Ethereum). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Bob applies for a job and wants to prove his academic qualifications to an employer, so he shares the attestation from his mobile wallet. The company (the verifier) can then confirm the validity of the attestation by checking the issuer's DID (i.e., its public key on Ethereum). 
```

### Off-chain attestations with persistent access {#offchain-attestations-with-persistent-access}

Under this arrangement attestations are transformed into JSON files and stored off-chain (ideally on a [decentralized cloud storage](/developers/docs/storage/) platform, such as IPFS or Swarm). However, a hash of the JSON file is stored on-chain and linked to a DID via an on-chain registry. The associated DID could either be that of the issuer of the attestation or the recipient. 

This approach enables attestations to gain blockchain-based persistence, while keeping claims information encrypted and verifiable. It also allows for selective disclosure since the holder of the private key can decrypt the information. 

### On-chain attestations {#onchain-attestations}

> On-chain attestations are held in [smart contracts](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/) on the Ethereum blockchain. The smart contract (acting as a registry in this case) will map an attestation to a corresponding on-chain DID (i.e., a public key). 
> 
> Here's an example to show on-chain attestations might work in practice:
> 
> 1. A company (XYZ Corp.) plans to sell ownership shares using a smart contract, but only wants buyers that have completed a background check.
> 
> 2. XYZ Corp. can have the company handling the background checks issue on-chain attestations on Ethereum. This attestation certifies that an individual (represented by a DID) has completed the check, but doesn't expose any personal information. 
> 
> 3. The smart contract handling the sales of shares can call the registry contract for identities of screened buyers. This makes it possible for the smart contract to determine who is permitted to buy shares or not. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On-chain attestations are held in [smart contracts](/developers/docs/smart-contracts/) on the Ethereum blockchain. The smart contract (acting as a registry) will map an attestation to a corresponding on-chain decentralized identifier (a public key).

Here's an example to show how on-chain attestations might work in practice:

1. A company (XYZ Corp) plans to sell ownership shares using a smart contract but only wants buyers that have completed a background check.

2. XYZ Corp can have the company performing background checks to issue on-chain attestations on Ethereum. This attestation certifies that an individual has passed the background check without exposing any personal information.

3. The smart contract selling shares can check the registry contract for the identities of screened buyers, making it possible for the smart contract to determine who is permitted to buy shares or not.
```

## Benefits of decentralized identity {#benefits-of-decentralized-identity} 

1. Decentralized identity increases increases individual control of identifying information. Decentralized identifiers and attestations can be verified without relying on centralized authorities and third-party services. 

2. Decentralized identity solutions facilitates a trustless, seamless, and privacy-protecting method for verifying and managing user identity. 

3. Decentralized identity harnesses blockchain technology, which creates trust between different parties and provides cryptographic guarantees to prove the validity of attestations.

4. Decentralized identity makes identity data portable. Users store attestations and identifiers in mobile wallet and can share with any party of their choice. Decentralized identifiers and attestations are not locked into the database of the issuing organization. 

## Decentralized identity use-cases {#decentralized-identity-use-cases}

Decentralized identity has many potential use-cases:

> ### 1. Universal dApp logins {#universal-dapp-logins} 

Reviewer 2: We prefer the 'dapp' stylisation on ethereum.org

```suggestion
### 1. Universal dapp logins {#universal-dapp-logins} 
```

Wondering if we should drop dapp entirely here. Doesn't need to be a dapp to benefit from something like SIWE

```suggestion
### 1. Universal logins {#universal-dapp-logins} 
```

Author: That makes sense (Web2 companies can also use decentralized identity, too). I'll replace "dapps" with "service providers" if that works.

[Decentralized applications](/dapps/) can issue attestations to users, which can be stored in an Ethereum wallet. An attestation in this case could be an an [NFT](/nft/) granting the holder access to an online community. 

> A [Sign-In With Ethereum](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4361) function would then enable servers to confirm the user's Ethereum account and fetch the required attestation from their account address. This means users can access the dapp without inputting passwords or sharing personal information.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [Sign-In with Ethereum](https://login.xyz/) function would then enable servers to confirm the user's Ethereum account and fetch the required attestation from their account address. This means users can access the dapp without inputting passwords or sharing personal information.  
```

> ### 2. KYC Authentication {#kyc-authentication}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 2. KYC authentication {#kyc-authentication}

```

Using many online services requires individuals to provide attestations and credentials, such as a driving license or national passport. But this approach is problematic because private user information can be compromised and service providers cannot verify the authenticity of the attestation. 

Decentralized identity allows companies to skip on conventional Know-Your-Customer (KYC) processes and authenticate user identities via Verifiable Credentials. This reduces the cost of identity management and prevents the use of fake documentation. 

### 3. Voting and online communities {#voting-and-online-communities}

Online voting and social media are two novel applications for decentralized identity. Online voting schemes are susceptible to manipulation, especially if malicious actors create false identities to vote. Asking individuals to present on-chain attestations can improve the integrity of online voting processes. 

> Decentralized identity can enable the creation of online communities that are free of fake accounts. Each user must authenticate their identity using an on-chain identity system, like the Ethereum Name Service, reducing the possibility of bots overrunning social platforms. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decentralized identity can help create online communities that are free of fake accounts. For example, each user might have to authenticate their identity using an on-chain identity system, like the Ethereum Name Service, reducing the possibility of bots.
```

> ## Use decentralized identity applications on Ethereum

Reviewer 2: I think we can drop 'on Ethereum here'. Can we also drop 'applications'? I think so... maybe it's technically less correct.

```suggestion
## Use decentralized identity {#use-decentralized-identity}
```

```suggestion
## Use decentralized identity applications {#use-decentralized-identity}
```

Author: Yup, saying "use decentralized identity" would likely be technically incorrect. Think of those projects mentioned as "identity-as-a-service" solutions. Here's a definition of IDaaS for context: 

*"Identity-as-a-service, or IDaaS, is an application delivery model (like software-as-a-service, or SaaS) that allows users to connect to and use identity management services from the cloud."*

> There are also many ambitious projects using Ethereum as a foundation for decentralized identity solutions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many ambitious projects using Ethereum as a foundation for decentralized identity solutions:
```

> **Ethereum Name Service (ENS) - _A decentralized naming system for on-chain, machine-readable identifiers, like, Ethereum wallet addresses, content hashes, and metadata._**
> - [Website](https://ens.domains/)
> 
> **SpruceID - _A decentralized identity project which allows users to control digital identity with Ethereum accounts and ENS profiles instead of relying on third-party services._** 
> - [Website](https://www.spruceid.com/)
> 
> **Proof of Humanity - _Proof of Humanity (or PoH) is a social identity verification system built on Ethereum._**
> - [Website](https://www.proofofhumanity.id/)
> 
> **BrightID - _A decentralized, open-source social identity network seeking to reform identity verification through the creation and analysis of a social graph._**
> - [Website](https://www.brightid.org/)

Reviewer 2: Just updating as per site conventions:

```suggestion
- **[Ethereum Name Service (ENS)](https://ens.domains/)** - _A decentralized naming system for on-chain, machine-readable identifiers, like, Ethereum wallet addresses, content hashes, and metadata._
- **[SpruceID](https://www.spruceid.com/)** - _A decentralized identity project which allows users to control digital identity with Ethereum accounts and ENS profiles instead of relying on third-party services._*
- **[Proof of Humanity](https://www.proofofhumanity.id)** - _Proof of Humanity (or PoH) is a social identity verification system built on Ethereum._
- **[BrightID](https://www.brightid.org/)** - _A decentralized, open-source social identity network seeking to reform identity verification through the creation and analysis of a social graph._

```

> ## Further reading

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Further reading {#further-reading}
```

- [Blockchain Use Cases: Blockchain in Digital Identity](https://consensys.net/blockchain-use-cases/digital-identity/) by ConsenSys
- [What is Ethereum ERC725? Self-Sovereign Identity Management on the Blockchain](https://cryptoslate.com/what-is-erc725-self-sovereign-identity-management-on-the-blockchain/) by Sam Town
- [How Blockchain Could Solve the Problem of Digital Identity](https://time.com/6142810/proof-of-humanity/) by Andrew R. Chow

> - [What Is Decentralized Identity And Why Should You Care?](https://web3.hashnode.com/what-is-decentralized-identity) by Emmanuel Awosika

Reviewer 2: This should follow the same convention as our other use case pages. [e.g. see our DeFi page](https://ethereum.org/en/defi/#futher-reading)

Author: Alright. I'll check for some resources I can add here.

Reviewer: Agree, but wouldn't call this a blocker personally. If we can find a few more things that would be great.

Author: I got some resources that could be useful and added them. LMK if they are good to go.

- **[Proof of Humanity](https://www.proofofhumanity.id)** - _Proof of Humanity (or PoH) is a social identity verification system built on Ethereum._
- **[BrightID](https://www.brightid.org/)** - _A decentralized, open-source social identity network seeking to reform identity verification through the creation and analysis of a social graph._

## Further reading {#further-reading}

### Articles {#articles}

- [Blockchain Use Cases: Blockchain in Digital Identity](https://consensys.net/blockchain-use-cases/digital-identity/) — _ConsenSys_
- [What is Ethereum ERC725? Self-Sovereign Identity Management on the Blockchain](https://cryptoslate.com/what-is-erc725-self-sovereign-identity-management-on-the-blockchain/) — _Sam Town_
- [How Blockchain Could Solve the Problem of Digital Identity](https://time.com/6142810/proof-of-humanity/) — _Andrew R. Chow_
- [What Is Decentralized Identity And Why Should You Care?](https://web3.hashnode.com/what-is-decentralized-identity) — _Emmanuel Awosika_

### Videos {#videos}

> - [Decentralized Identity (Bonus Livestream Session)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ySHNB1za_SE&t=539s) — _A great explainer video on decentralized identity by Andreas Antonopolous_
> - [Sign In with Ethereum and Decentralized Identity with Ceramic, IDX, React, and 3ID Connect](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9gWZYJxk7c) — _YouTube utorial on building out an identity management system for creating, reading, and updating a user's profile using their Ethereum wallet by Nader Dabit_
> - [BrightID - Decentralized Identity on Ethereum](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3DbMFYGRoM) — _Bankless podcast episode discussing BrightID, a decentralized identity solution for Ethereum_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Decentralized Identity (Bonus Livestream Session)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ySHNB1za_SE&t=539s) — _A great explainer video on decentralized identity by Andreas Antonopolous_
- [Sign In with Ethereum and Decentralized Identity with Ceramic, IDX, React, and 3ID Connect](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9gWZYJxk7c) — _YouTube utorial on building out an identity management system for creating, reading, and updating a user's profile using their Ethereum wallet by Nader Dabit_
- [BrightID - Decentralized Identity on Ethereum](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3DbMFYGRoM) — _Bankless podcast episode discussing BrightID, a decentralized identity solution for Ethereum_
- [The Off Chain Internet: Decentralized Identity & Verifiable Credentials](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZ_Bb6j87mg) — EthDenver 2022 presentation by Evin McMullen
```

---
title: Decentralized identity 
description: What is decentralized identity, and why does it matter?
lang: en
template: use-cases
emoji: ":id:"
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2
summaryPoint1: Traditional identity systems have centralized the issuance, maintenance and control of your identifiers.

> summaryPoint2: Decentralized identity solutions give the power back to the individual, further decreasing reliance on centralized third-parties.

Reviewer 2: These should be pithier.

```suggestion
summaryPoint2: Decentralized identity removes reliance on centralized third parties.
```

> summaryPoint3: Thanks to crypto, users now have the tools to issue, hold and control their own identifiers and attestations once again. 

Reviewer 2: Users can't issue their attestations (well they can, but self-issued attestations in theory should be meaningless)

Author: Oh, I think the "issue" part only has to do with decentralized identifiers. A possible suggestion would be to  rework the sentence to read: "Thanks to crypto, users can now issue identifiers, and hold and control attestations." Does this work?
